At NETCOG, N-C-T-C-O-G, in addition to what we've
just mentioned, I was instrumental in starting
the water planning, and the way it worked out was
that the initial staff that was there, the nucleus
of three years. What program, what federal agency
was that? Well, at that time it was the predecessor
of EPA, Water Resources Council or something like
that. They hadn't established EPA yet, and it was a
federated program and dealt with with the
regional planning of wastewater and water
supply, that kind of thing, but primarily
wastewater. And so the Upper Trinity River study
began with my being the staff coordinator for it
before a water director was hired. And then when
the program got going, a water director was hired,
and the thing moved into his hands. The same thing
happened with a number of other programs. For
example, Dan Petty, who was the director director
of administration for the office, helped to
establish the police academy there. Then when a
police academy director was hired, that was all
given to him. And I started the first work on the A95
review program when it was initiated. And then a
director of regional services was appointed, and
he took that over. In fact, I think that Dan was the
guy that took it over, but I was in on the first part
of it. A lot of it was, you might say, getting the
ball rolling and never following through on very
many things. And we also started the population
estimating program that now is an annual event at
Cogginby. It's a very important part. This is one
of the things that Bill Pitstick was very
interested in and thought was very important. I
think he was very right in his estimation about
that, and it's a very important and a really
reasonably accurate estimation program being
within 3% of the 1980 census for most cities in the
area. Another thing that we did which stands alone
in some respects, and this involves another one of
the people you're going to interview, Mike
Mahoney, is that sometime in somewhere between 73
and 75, I believe, maybe 72, we decided that A lot of
cities in our region needed a lot of planning help,
and that they needed some models. And when I say we,
this was a special committee under the A95 review
system. I sort of grew up with planners and
engineers and some city managers on there. And
they said, we need to have some models for local
development ordinances. And so we developed a
committee, and our staff developed an outline of
what we wanted, solicited proposals from
consultants. And Mike Mahoney, who had been
director of planning in Fort Worth, was now
consulting, won the award and developed what was
called the Model Land Development Code, number
one, and number two, the Community Planning
Manual series. And the first, I can provide you
with a little description of that for your
appendix, essentially what the development code
was. was a combination of zoning ordinance and
subdivision regulations, floodplain
regulations, and what do you call it, trailer
home, mobile home park kind of regulations, and
special district, industrial parks, apartment
buildings, and shopping center regulations,
that kind of thing. Did this come about about the
same time as the ALI model ended up in court? This
preceded it. And incidentally, I was very
surprised to see that I had been one of the first
persons in all modesty, I say, is to be invited by
Charlie Haar way back in the mid-'70s when they
were starting work on this thing. No, it was the
mid-'60s, mid-'60s, because it was a 10-year
project which ended around 75, 76. And Charlie
Haar was with the HHFA at that time in Washington.
And he'd invited, I don't know, about 20 of us,
planners, to come in. And because of my work in
Tulsa and Broadly because of that reputation, I
was invited to take part in that. And I still have
those old files of the first drafts and the
original meeting that was held on that thing.
Anyways, this was separate. But the idea of a
development code which combined and simply
combined subdivision and zoning ordinances into
one code was actually evident in this model and
development code. And maybe we didn't call it
quite that. Maybe it was model community
development or something like that. I can give you
this complete description of it. And Mike was the
guy that did it. He can tell you more about it. Then
the other thing that happened there at COG that I
think I would take some pride in, because this is
the one thing that's cited in all works about
planning in Texas, is this COG series of 10 small
manuals, each about 3 eighths to a half an inch
thick. And they want to update that now. And
hopefully, we can help them through the APA to do
that. Anyways, the other activity that led, in a
sense, to my leaving the COG was that in about 1975,
we were invited by the Institute of Urban Studies
at UT Arlington to express interest or to evaluate
a training program that they had come upon by
virtue of being involved in a multi-state Title I
Higher Education Act kind of study of training for
local government people and so forth in which they
did something in some other state. It happens that
St. John's University in St. Cloud, Minnesota was
the one that had developed for the state planning
office there a series of training packages for
local officials. And they were small little
workshops of three hours each, one on zoning, one
on subdivision regulation, et cetera. They had
developed about six of those. And they were
providing them as a part of this bigger interstate
study and said, what we'll do is we'll say, OK, you
take these packages, you see if they're
applicable in your state, and then you Try them
out, and use them for training. And we'll do the
same. We'll take what you've developed, and we'll
try it out in our area. But what happened was, with
some way or another, they were able to hire Doug
Crear and P.D. Crear, Jr. And he came on the staff,
and he took the zoning module that they had and
adapted it to Texas zoning law and revised the
slideshow and so forth. And then when they got that
all done, they had about, let's say, three or four
others that were really worthy They asked me, what
do I think of it? I said, the only way I can tell you
that is to try it out. And so we indeed tried it. And
in 1975, in August, I believe, we had our first
trial in Euless, Texas. And we invited several
cities from around there to send people. And it was
a Friday and a Saturday. We had four modules, three
hours in the morning, three hours in the
afternoon. And that led, on my part, to, in the next
few years, to conducting about 12 of these two-day
workshops all over north central Texas. And I
became interested in doing that, and did that
almost exclusively, and then made a transition
from working at COG to working at UT Arlington in
the Institute of Urban Studies. And there was an
intermediate period there where I was actually
under contract to the COG to continue to conduct
some of those workshops for them on a more or less
quarterly basis. And when I got to UT Arlington,
because of that experience, we decided, or they
decided, the dean and so forth decided to get into
another federally-aided program that involved
us with the Texas Municipal League and with the
similar leagues in the four adjoining states. on a
similar kind of program to try out providing the
leads with the capacity to train their people.
Well, we had a very successful project insofar as
the quality of training and the reactions of the
training. But it turned out that they really
needed professional planners interested in
training and delivering the thing to make it work.
In other words, they needed something like the
short course or a modified form of it, which is what
these workshops were, a modified form. And that
one thing led to another so that eventually we had
some three federated programs that involved
different groups. We finally even worked with the
Texas Department of Community Affairs on
preparing some extra planning so that the
original six modules, which the Institute of
Urban Studies obtained in 1975 as being a part of
this project, now numbers some 30 modules. that I
can also provide you with the short titles of all
those, running almost the full range. And as an
example, instead of running just four workshops a
year, in the next month, I'll be running five or six
workshops.
parties to five or six workshops, because others
are involved as well. We try to do it that way now.
And these do not, incidentally, as was feared
initially by some of the people on the educational
foundation, these do not take the place of what
they complement and supplement the short course.
And indeed, the educational foundation is now
looking toward trying to establish these more
strongly with each of the COGs, if possible, or at
least each of the APA sections in the state so that
there will be educational foundation support for
regionalized training. In a sense, a mini short
course that can be regionalized and closely
correlated with the annual short course that
started in 1971, as we said, and will become part of
an integrated program of training for local
officials.
At UT Arlington, the printing program in
planning, called the City and Regional Planning
Program, was initiated at the same time that the
School of Architecture and Environmental Design
was established. And the exact date of that, I
can't be sure, but it was sometime around 1970, if I
remember correctly. Or maybe it was mid-'70s.
Anyway, that is a matter of record. We can dig that
out to be sure about it. But Harold Box, who was a
prominent architect, member of the firm of Pratt,
Box, and Whitney in Dallas, was apparently
invited by the university or some way to become the
first dean, and he established the school. And he
included in that architecture, landscape
architecture, environmental design, and
building construction, and urban and regional
planning, about a five-pronged total program.
And I guess maybe eventually interior design came
in or something too in that whole thing. And the man
that he hired as the first director was Joe B.
Goldstein, AICP. who can probably add some to this
about the early history of it. Anyways,
initially, it was under the auspices of that
Architectural and Environmental Design. And
then about two years ago, moved over to the
Institute of Urban Studies since it became very
much more closely associated with local
government concerns, which was part of the
Institute's purview. And the, what shall I say,
the program was the third in Texas, and was the
third recognized program in Texas. And I don't
recall right now, but I know that the North Central
Texas section of the AIP volunteered to Hal Box to
help design a curriculum. And the chairperson of
that committee was Mike Mahoney. And I was a member
of that. And I don't remember now who the other two
or three members were. Maybe Bill Shevlin, I
believe, was one of them, too. And I must say,
however, that again, Mike Mahoney did the bulk of
the work on that. And Bill Shevlin, because of his
experience in teaching planning and having been
on a planning faculty, I'm sure made more
contributions than I did. My experience in
teaching planning had gone back to being an
adjunct and a visiting lecturer at some 20
universities, in fact, starting with University
of Arkansas when I first went to Tulsa. But
anyways, the point was that Mike and I had become
associated at Texas Christian University when he
was on the adjunct faculty there, and he invited me
to join them in about 68. And so some of my work of
that type also supported my going into
educational work as a third career, as it were. And
the initial outline of the curriculum for the
school was at least proposed by Professional
Planning Society. It's February 23rd, and the
next interview is with Mike Mahoney.